Bulletin boards (BBS0)
======================

Chat is ephemeral. A user who joins an hour late has missed everything said
before they arrived, and an operator who wants to leave a notice where users
will find it has nowhere to put it. BBS0 gives the hub bulletin boards in the
sense Usenet used the term: lists of posts, each of which may be a reply to
another, that a client downloads once and keeps.

uhub implements the hub side of the BBS0 draft. What that means in practice is
worth stating plainly, because it decides how you run one.


What the hub holds, and what it does not
----------------------------------------

The hub holds an index and nothing else. For each board it keeps an ordered
list of entries; an entry records the Tiger tree hash naming a post document,
its declared size, the board, the CID of the session the hub accepted it from,
the nick that session held, the parent post if it is a reply, the thread root,
the subject and the time the hub accepted it.

The bytes of a post never touch the hub. A post is a file, named by its hash,
and a client fetches it from whichever clients hold it, over the same search
and transfer machinery it uses for any other file. Nothing new is added to that
exchange; the hub is not in it at all.

Three consequences follow, and none of them is a defect:

- A board is only as durable as its readers. When the author disconnects and no
  one else has fetched a post, its entry remains and its content cannot be
  retrieved. Clients are required to show that state rather than hide the post.
- An operator who wants a board to last should run a client that subscribes to
  it and fetches and serves every post. Nothing distinguishes such a client
  from any other, which makes durability a deployment decision rather than a
  protocol feature.
- The hub cannot check that a post exists, that it hashes to the name given,
  that it is the size declared, or that its author is the session that
  submitted it. Every one of those checks belongs to the reading client, which
  has the document and can do them; the hub has neither.

What the hub *can* refuse is who may post where, how large a post may be, how
often one session may post, and how far back it will replay. That is what the
configuration below is about.


Configuration
-------------

In uhub.conf:

	bbs_enable = yes
	file_bbs_boards = /etc/uhub/boards.conf
	file_bbs_index = /var/lib/uhub/bbs.db

The index database is created if it does not exist. It holds index entries
only, never the content of a post, and it is an ordinary SQLite file: you can
open it with the sqlite3 shell to see what a board holds.

Boards are defined one per line in the boards file. See doc/boards.conf for a
worked example; the short version is:

	board general title="General discussion" post=guest replay_days=90

The permissions -- subscribe, post, reply, withdraw_own and withdraw_any --
each name the lowest credential that holds them, or "none" for nobody.
Separating post from reply is deliberate and is the most useful thing here: a
board where anyone may reply but only operators may start a thread is the
natural form of an announcements board.

A board a session may not subscribe to is not merely read-protected. The hub
never tells that session the board exists, and refuses a subscription to it in
the same words it uses for a board that is not there. Withholding the
descriptor is the whole of the mechanism for hiding a board.


Timestamps, catching up, and why nothing is inserted in the past
---------------------------------------------------------------

Every entry carries the time the hub accepted it, and that timestamp is both
the post's place in the board's order and the cursor a client resumes from. A
client that has been away reconnects, says where it got to, and receives
everything since -- and then keeps receiving entries as they arrive, because
the backlog and the live feed are one stream.

Three rules make that work, and uhub keeps all three:

- A new entry never takes a timestamp lower than the highest already on the
  board. If the clock moves backwards the highest value is reused rather than a
  lower one, because a client that has caught up to a given second will never
  ask for anything earlier.
- Timestamps are never perturbed to make them unique. Two posts in the same
  second is ordinary on a busy board; a client identifies an entry by its hash,
  not its time.
- Nothing enters the index in the past. A post takes the time of its arrival,
  never the time its author claims. That is what lets a cursor work without a
  generation counter to guard it.

A withdrawal gives the entry a *new* timestamp -- the time of the withdrawal --
while keeping its hash. That is what places the tombstone at the head of the
stream, where it reaches a subscriber at once and an absent client as soon as
it resumes. The original timestamp would leave it behind every cursor that had
already gone past.

Withdrawal is not deletion. It removes an index entry; the document may by then
be held by every client that read it, and will go on being served by them. A
tombstone is a request, honoured by clients that receive it and meaningless to
those that do not, which is why "withdraw" is the word used throughout and why
an interface offering to "delete" a post would be making a promise nothing here
can keep. Replies to a withdrawn post are separate posts and are not removed
with it.


Sizing a board
--------------

Two settings decide how much a board can cost you.

bbs_max_posts_per_board (default 5000) is the number of entries retained. Past
it the oldest are dropped, and the board's declared replay horizon moves
forward with them, so the hub never promises a replay it cannot deliver. This
is also what bounds the burst a client can ask for: a client subscribing from
the beginning of a board receives every retained entry at once. At roughly 250
bytes an entry, the default is a little over a megabyte -- the same order as
the user list a busy hub already sends at login.

replay_days, per board, is the other bound: how far back the hub will replay at
all. A client asking for something older is served from the horizon rather than
refused, and it is told the horizon in advance so it knows its view of the
board has a gap it cannot close. On a large board, set this to what you can
afford to replay rather than to the age of the oldest entry you happen to hold.

bbs_post_interval (default 60 seconds) rate-limits submission per session.
Unrestricted users -- bots and unrestricted operators -- are not limited.
bbs_max_subscriptions (default 8) bounds how many boards one session may hold
at once.


What a client is required to do
-------------------------------

Worth knowing when evaluating one, because the hub cannot enforce any of it.

Before displaying a post, a client must verify that what it fetched hashes to
the name it asked for, and discard it entirely if not. Until that has passed,
an index entry is a stranger's description of a file that may not exist. The
author, the parent, the subject and the content are inside that hash, so a hub
cannot alter any of them for a client that checks -- which is the whole point
of the split between the document and the index.

What the hub says and no hash covers: which posts appear on the board at all,
when they arrived, and how threads are grouped. A client can reconstruct true
threading from the parent links in the documents it has verified, and should
where the two disagree.

The nick in an index entry is informative and nothing more. It is not in the
document, is unique on no hub and at no time, and must not be used to attribute
a post or to match against an ignore list -- those decisions belong to the CID.
The CID in the entry means only: this hub says it accepted this post from a
session that had authenticated as this CID. uhub decides "your own post", for
withdrawal, on exactly that and never on the nick.

Note also that reading a post is visible: the author is at first the only party
who can serve it, so fetching one discloses the reader to them. A well-behaved
client does not fetch automatically when an entry arrives.


See also
--------

- doc/boards.conf -- a worked boards file.
- doc/uhub.conf -- the options above, in context.
- The BBS0 specification, in the ADC extensions repository.
